## Live technical interviews, and why they matter

Let's call these BWTRLTI - Bad Ways To Run Live Technical Interviews.

## BWTRLTI #1 : Old School Q&A

Meh. There's a role for questions, to fill gaps in your understanding
of a candidate's knowledge.

This makes candidates feel like they are specimens in a petri
dish. But I don't want to dissect them, I want to have a conversation
with them. I want to learn more about them by exploring ideas, and
problems and solutions.

Golden rule : if you can discover something about a candidate by
solving a problem with them in code, do it that way.

For example, if I've seen someone confidently and competently exercise
their knowledge of the C++ Standard Library in a practical, I'm not
going to sit afterwards with them and ask standard-issue unimaginative
questions about ```std::vector```. I want to make the most of the time
I have with a candidate, and duplication of effort is just daft. I
know enough about the candidate's ability in this respect, and now I'd
move on to other, more interesting things.

## BWTRLTI #2 : Whiteboarding

This approach is pretty awful. So disliked is whiteboarding as a live
interview format, that SH (Twitter) maintains a list of companies that
**don't** do whiteboarding.

I'd add an exception though - if you're working on a pairing exercise,
design or coding, if you both want to sketch something out as part of
the solution, this is OK.

Just don't give people a problem, a pen, and ask them to write code on
a board.

If you want to write code, write it in an editor, with a unit test,
compile it and run the test. This is how actual software development
works, which is what you're hiring for, so why would you not do it
that way in an interview?

## BWTRLTI #3 : Experience-Based Discussion

## BWTRLTI #4 : 

## Running Non-Sucky Algo Interviews

TODO: selecting the problem
TODO: micro-benchmark and complexity estimation
TODO: godbolt compiler explorer and conversation

Cool, so now we have an experimental framework we can use. We've got
tests that tells us whether the implementation is functionally
correct, and we've got a way of measuring the algorithmic complexity
of the implementation too. Just think how much potential there is now
for interesting discussions! What fun!

If you're working in C or C++ and want to get maximally hypergeeky,
you can also look at the code generation in the magical and have a
conversation with the candidate around that.

The tools and the language don't matter - you'll find something in
Python, Javascript, Swift or anything else that lets you 

Make it an exploration. With exploration comes discussion, and a deep
understanding of the candidate's ability and potential. Be engaged,
make it a partnership, make an equal contribution, and even have fun.

## Links

http://stephaniehurlburt.com/blog/2016/12/5/list-of-companies-that-dont-use-whiteboarding-in-interviews

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nXaxk27zwlk

Benchmark

https://github.com/google/benchmark
Godbolt
