# Technical Hiring

## Background

I do talks and workshops on software development careers and tech
hiring for students at universities, colleges and code academies. It's
occurred to me recently that I'm very tardy in having those same
conversations with employers. Technical interviewing is an acquired
skill, but it's something that's often left to chance in
organisations.

This 3-part post aims to give some advice to individuals and companies
who are involved in hiring developers. It's not exhaustive, but
hopefully you'll take away some ideas you can apply in your own
organisation.

I'm going to nail my colours to the mast here : I'm a techy, and this
is written from the perspective of a developer (and occasional
technical manager...) interviewing and hiring other developers, not an
HR, talent or recruitment perspective. I hope and expect that there's
a significant overlap between these perspectives, though.

Let's warm up with a lively jog around some of the essential concepts
that we'll build on in the next couple of posts.

## Hire For Trajectory

There's a quote by Kevlin Henney that appeared in a preface to Pete
Goodliffe's book "Becoming a Better Programmer"
<sup>[1](#fn1)</sup>. I often share this quote in talks, because it
captures perfectly what I'm looking for when I'm building teams:

> "[...] In the long term, what matters is less where on the
distribution someone is than where they are headed. If you want to
divide programmers into two groups, there are programmers who get
better and programmers who don't. You care about the first group."

What you're seeing when you run technical interviews is a snapshot of
someone's abilities and knowledge, frozen at a point in time. But
where did they start, how far have they come, and where are they
headed?

The challenge in technical hiring is to spot these self-actualising,
self-improving developers that Kevlin talks about, not just by looking
at what they can do, but by looking at their journey, their attitude,
the signs that they have improved, and continue to improve. We'll talk
more about this in later posts.

- Hire people for where they're going to be, not for where they are
  now.

## Hire For Diversity

I've worked in software development for 30 years. I've seen some
progress over that time, but the pace is still painfully slow. On
gender diversity, we have a long way to go. We all have a
responsibility to fix the situation in tech for fuhndamental reasons
of equality, quite apart from the benefits that diverse teams bring.

But benefits there most certainly are. Diverse teams are *good*
teams. Any developer will tell you about the value of a different
mindset and a different perspective when solving problems.

To help counter unconscious bias in hiring, use the existing diversity
in your team help you get to the next level. Get as diverse a pool of
technical interviewers involved in your hiring process as you can, and
give them a *real voice* in the hiring decision, not just tagging
along for the ride.

Actively coach people in your team in technical interviewing - it's a
skill like any other, and it needs practice. If it remains something
that senior managers do, you're not going to make progress.

Some interview styles favour male candidates, in particular those
candidates who are confident, assertive and sell themselves
effectively. Bragging isn't a uniquely male trait, but it's certainly
more prevalent. If you structure your technical hiring around these
formats, and factor in the unconscious bias that favours "ambitious"
candidates, you've got a toxic combination on your hands.

In some of the interview styles we're going to look at, there are
positive benefits for diverse hiring. We'll favour approaches that
focus on collaborative traits, and give a more holistic view of how
someone would fare in a team setting.

- Make diversity in tech hiring an explicit goal, not an afterthought.

- Use interviewing approaches that favour collaborative
  problem-solving, rather than just giving a stage for confident and
  assertive candidates to be confident and assertive.

- Don't use "ninja developer" and "rockstar developer" cliches : it's
  language that encourages bias. Also, developers will laugh at you
  behind your back.

- Mitigate the effects of unconscious bias by having diversity in your
  pool of technical interviewers.

- Coach everyone in your team on technical interviewing, and give them
  practice. It's difficult to get right. 

## Hire Across The Experience Range

It's a tough, competitive market to be hiring in. I see companies
looking to fill the same roles month after month. The pool of highly
experienced developers is finite, and none of them are sitting on the
bench waiting for your call.

Accept that you're going to hire less experienced people, and be
prepared to invest in them. Actually, scratch that - don't accept it,
*celebrate it*. Helping out the next generation of developers is a
great thing - for your company, for your experienced developers who
get to mentor them, and of course for those next-generation developers
too.

Start looking into apprenticeships, coding academies, and new graduate
entrants. I've seen new graduate entrants to development roles make
astounding progress over 1-2 years from a standing start, given the
right access to technical mentors.

As you do this, I recommend you take a good, hard look at your
organisation and culture, and think about what you need to do to make
it a supportive learning environment for teams with mixed levels of
experience.

- Build a learning culture in your organisation : encourage informal
  learning, pairing and mentoring.

- Support it more concretely than with mere words : build learning
  time into the working week.

- Actively encourage people to help out less experienced developers,
  and let everyone know that it's part of the company's culture.

None of these things need to be part of a formal performance process,
and none of them need any kind of coordination by a central learning
team. They should happen spontaneously, continuously and organically
in teams. Don't kill the vibe by trying to manage it, just give people
the time, space and support to learn.

One of the best support mechanisms I've used to help learning and
sharing is the Communities Of Practice model. Again : trust them,
don't manage them.

For many organisations, these things are a significant cultural shift,
but it's a good shift. If this idea is new to you, think of it as the
first step towards the culture of trust, empowerment and autonomy your
company needs to thrive in the digital era.

- Hire developers at the start of the career, and mentor and support
  them.

- Build a culture of learning.

- Support this culture through dedicated learning time, and
  Communities of Practice.

- Trust people to learn in their teams and communities.

## Your Funnel's Broken

Most organisations implement something like this model in their hiring
process.

TODO: funnel diagram

It's quite industrialised, and a little impersonal...but I
understand. Hiring is a time-consuming business, and it takes
developers away from their day jobs to help with technical
interviewing<sup>[2](#fn2)</sup>.

We tend to think of this in a positive light : "we're going forward
with the candidates we're most confident in". What we think about a
lot *less* is this : __the vast majority of decisions we make about
candidates are made when we know the least about them.__

## Get The Spec Right

You don't have to look far for terrible role specifications. I'm not
sure if other disciplines suffer as badly as software development in
this regard.

Note : some developers actually prefer this, because it gives them a
very detailed. I think that tech background is useful, but I'd keep it
separate from the role spec.

Some companies get this very right. Here's an example of a recent job
advert from FanDuel:

This is close to perfect. It talks about the company, the culture, the
kind of person who's going to fit.  It doesn't include an endless list
of specific technical skills.

Right at the heading of the page, there's this statement:

"We don’t want employees, we want player coaches – empowered to make
their own decisions, learn from mistakes and execute what works."

Great : here's a company that embraces experimentation and
learning. It's also very much two-way traffic. So many job ads are
not : a list of must-have skills that you need to have to be
considered for the role.

You're selling your organisation.

TODO: don't do big shopping list of tech skills

## Plan Ahead

Think up front. If you don't, you'll end up with candidates sitting
pensively in reception, while you scrabble around upstairs trying to
figure out how to do a tech interview. This is not a good look.

TODO: rework

Someone will produce a grubby handful of A4 sheets (triumphantly,
always triumphantly : there's usually an "aha!" involved). Yes, this
is the time-honoured tech interview questions list. Every organisation
has one : dog-eared, coffee-stained, grubby and mildewed, a museum
piece of technical minutiae, corner cases and trick questions,
deprecated APIs and obsolete practices.

This the interviewing tool of last resort, and you're better than
that.

Most importantly, *tell candidates what the process is*. The format of
technical interviews should never be a surprise to people. They
shouldn't even need to ask. Make it clear on your website, restate in
any email communication, and invite people to email or call you if
they need clarification on any part of the process.

Remember also that proportionality is important, and that you need to
get technical interviewing right for the experience level of the
candidate. If you're specifically hiring early careers candidates for
a specific role, putting these candidates into the exact same process
you use for experienced candidates is not going to give you a fair
view of their ability and potential. You need to calibrate the
difficulty level of challenges, and consider skipping or replacing
some steps.

## Coming Next
Most organisations find that they need to have some kind of screening
stage. In the next post, we're going to look different tech screening
tools and techniques, and figure out how to get the best out of them,
for both you and the candidate.

##  Resources

<a name="fn1">1</a>: This is a great book, and I highly recommend it
both to developers starting out, and to experienced developers who are
mentoring new starts.

<a name="fn2">2</a>: Although the Theory Of Constraint would suggest
that if having the right people on your team is the bottleneck that's
stopping your business meeting its goals, then this is the priority
you should be focusing on
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theory_of_constraints
